---
title: 'I am a Computational Neuroethologist'
date: 2021-05-13
permalink: /posts/2021/05/blog-post-2/
tags:
  - FAQ
  - Cognition
  - Computational Neuroethology
---

I have had a few people ask me what my research is. I tend to give different answers depending on who is asking
and why. However, I don't do that many different things. I think of my research as one thing (with a couple parts).
The easiest label I could give my research is Computational Neuroethology. The problem is not a lot of people are
familiar with that field and so the label makes it more confusing. The goal of this post is to clear up that confusion
both for the family that asks what I do and myself.

A Study of Intelligence
===============
Like most neuroscientists, cognitive psychologists, and AI researchers, I am fascinated by intelligence. The problem is
no one knows what intelligence means. Sometimes intelligence means answering a specific question in detail, sometimes
it means doing well across a few different tasks, and sometimes it just means doing something complicated. The result
is that there are thousands of people doing thousands of things all of whom study intelligence. Don't get me wrong, I
am all for pluralism, but this can make it confusing to describe what I mean when I say I study intelligent systems.\\
I take a non-traditional view of intelligence. One which is heavily inspired by the [Biology of Cognition or Santiago
School of cognition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Santiago_theory_of_cognition).

Artificial to Human Intelligence
======
My interest, since before college was AI. I wanted to build something useful. My goal was to end work. 
I decided to major in Computer Science because I thought that could teach me the skills I needed. As I studied
CS, I realized the stuff where I learned the most and got excited was the mathematics. This became especially 
apparent as I learned about the field of Bio-Inspired Computation (cellular automata, boids, neural networks).
As I studied math and learned more about AI, I realized that the relationship between AI and human brains
was deep. They could be expressed in the same mathematical language. From there I was drawn to Cognitive Science
a field which was designed around that theoretical connection between artificial and human intelligence. Cognitive
science studies Cognition. It is a "science of thought."

Human to Animal Intelligence
===========================
The next step in my development came in my first year at grad school. I was studying the relationship between
human and artificial minds in the context of language. In my first semester, I took a class by Randall Beer on
the topic of Embodied Cognition (Autopoiesis and Enaction). This semester long class broke down and destroyed 
every idea I thought I had about minds. Every analogy and every argument I ever made was wrong. The reason it
was wrong was because I forgot a fact so basic, that I still don't know why it is not always considered 
fundamental. Humans are alive. Life is what underlies a mind. Cognition is not an abstract process but a biological
one. It is instantiated in living creatures as they follow their biological needs. The ideas that I thought define
human cognition turn out to not be great at defining animal cognition. In fact, humans are one special case of the

Topics That Interest me
======
- Embodied Cognition
- The Philosophy of Biology
- What Cognition Can Tell Us About Politics

