---
title: 'What is Computational Neuroethology'
date: 2021-05-13
permalink: /posts/2021/05/ComputationalNeuroethology/
tags:
  - Cognition
  - Computational Neuroethology
  - Research Fields
---

When friends or family ask what I study, depending on my mood, the 
answer can be neuroscience, cognitive science,
animal behavior, computational biology, artificial intelligence, and 
if I am feeling really frisky I'll combine them. I don't think I'm lying. 
Although, there is a real name for 
what I study: computational neuroethology. In this post I want to 
explain what those words mean and by the end you can let me know if 
I'm being honest.

A Study of Mind
===============
Like most neuroscientists, cognitive scientists, and AI researchers, 
I am interested in minds. The problem is no one knows what a mind is.
Philosophers have been working on this question for millennia and we 
still don't know when something has or doesn't have a mind. 
Scientists being a little too busy to care about a correct definition,
have come up with their own definitions based on what they each find 
most interesting. Letting a thousand flowers bloom tends to work well,
so I support it. However, for any scientists out there, it doesn't 
hurt to read some philosophy once in a while.

My definition of a mind is mainly inspired by the 
[Biology of Cognition or Santiago School](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Santiago_theory_of_cognition). 
The basic idea is that minds are a property of life: that it can
"make its own decisions." This feature of life
is hard to pin down exactly but becomes most obvious when we look at
how organisms survive. Animals don't move randomly, they navigate to
food, avoid predators, find safety. They don't behave based on fixed 
rules but instead adjust their behavior to improve their chance of
survival. This is also sometimes called adaptive behavior. For me 
this is the foundation of what it means to have a mind. In adaptive
behavior we see goals, intentionality, and values. Seems like a good
place to try to study minds.

A Science of Behavior
=========
The study of animal behavior has existed for a long time. Charles Darwin himself spent much of his time travelling
and examining how animals act. Ethology is the term used for the biological side of animal behavior research. 
Ethologists promote studying animals in natural habitats preforming autonomous behavior. This differentiates it from 
most other fields of animal research, where animals are kept in highly controlled environments solving very 
restricted problems. The ethological argument goes that animals evolved in their natural habitat to do what they 
do and to understand them we must observe them in that context.

Taking Behavior Seriously
==========================
One limitation of traditional ethology was that it remained 
descriptive. Much of the discipline was focused on building a 
library of behaviors rather than tackling what unified all of them. 
How behavior is coordinated was almost completely ignored. In response
the field grew a new appendage. One which
added the toolkit of neuroscience. Neuroethology is a discipline 
concerned with the relationship between brain and behavior. 
Neuroethologists not only study how an animal acts and moves but also 
what is going in the animal's brain when that movement happens. In 
this way neuroethologists try to provide a mechanistic description of 
how action and perception together create behavior.

What about the Computers
===========================
Neuroethology is a small niche but one advantage of the label is its
lack of preconceived meaning. Computational
on the other hand means a lot of things. The computational 
component of computational neuroethology might best be understood in 
relation to computational physics. When quantifying phenomena in the 
world sometimes things get complicated.
When a physicist is curious about how a fluid 
flows, they do not do the math by hand. They use a computer to simulate 
the many complex equations as they interact. This is the computation 
in computational neuroethology. Except rather than simulating 
particles I simulate brains, bodies and environments. I build video 
game worlds and populate it with virtual animal bodies connected to 
virtual brains. Luckily AI can serve as the virtual brain and 
robotics provides virtual bodies. I then compare how 
my virtual robot behaves to how the animal behaves. By doing this 
repeatedly and building different worlds and different brains
and different bodies we might understand what unifies all adaptive
behavior: A grand theory of thought. 

Final Words
==================
In short, my day to day work is playing make believe with video game animals.
I am optimistic that it will lead to more than that though. My goal 
is to help contribute to a formal theory of minds. 
Such a theory would 
not look like the human-centered, rationalist, or psychological approaches 
that have dominated our historical understanding. Instead, I believe it will 
show us how genuinely unexceptional humans really are and how special life 
itself is. A theory of thought that will teach us 
that there is a continuity between us and every one of our relatives on
this planet. A continuity not only in our historical lineage but a true
recognition that all life has wants and desires and rich inner lives. 
Most optimistically I hope to help build a theory that reminds us that we have
so much to learn and unless we listen we will lose it all. 
