---
title: 'Situated Embodied Dynamical Cognition for Gamers'
date: 2021-06-07
permalink: /posts/2021/05/blog-post-4/
tags:
  - Introduction
  - Purpose
  - Goals
---

This blog post is meant to introduce how I think about video games.

- AI and games
- Planning based games
    - Chess
    - Go
- Embodied Games
    - Dead Cells
    - Call of Duty
    - The witness
- How we can think in a situated embo

Let's say you are someone interested in understanding intelligence. You need a model system. Intelligence
is big, it's broad and it's complicated. To be able to experiment and theorize about it is we need to put
it in a simple context. This is why so much time, money, and computing power is spent on building an
AI that plays chess, go, or jeopardy. Games provide a simplified environment in which we can think about
an intelligence making decisions. Much of modern artificial intelligence (especially the one closest to me
reinforcement learning) is motivated by building AI that play games well. The thought is that the things we
learn from building an AI that plays chess will be helpful when we build a general intelligent AI. This strategy
has been extremely successful. The best example is Deepmind's AlphaGo. This AI was a proof of concept that a
bunch of decentralized neurons who are optimizing can be very good at playing a game that others
thought unplayable. In this way the strategy 
was successful. Deep learning has taken over and many new AI applications are being developed everyday based on
deep reinforcement learning (including my own research). However, a problem with the games approach taken so far
is about the kind of games that people consider. In this post I will try to explain the distinction between the
cognitivist approach to intelligence vs the emergentist approach to intelligence. If you don't know what those 
terms mean yet then that's what this post is for.

Chess and Computational Mind
======
To tell a toy version of history let's start with the game of Chess. Chess is played on a board with 64 tiles.
In the world of chess player 1 makes a move, player 2 makes a move, and so on. There is no parallelism no timing
just looking at the board and making a decision. So I want to make an AI that plays chess how could I do it?\\
This is where symbolic manipulations or computationalism comes in. Anyone who has played chess has probably
"thought a few moves ahead." In the world of algorithms we call this process enumeration. I consider the consequence
of one move, if I like it I make it, if not I look at the consequence of the next move and so on. This is a relatively
straightforward way to solve a problem. I look at my options one by one and pick the best one. For chess and many other
daily tasks this is often how I find myself thinking. What's nice about this way of thinking is how easy it is
to implement on a computer. Anyone whose written a for loop before should what I'm talking about.\\
One limitation is that this is not always possible. Even in chess I can look at every possible sequence of moves. That would
be too long. I can however, look at the most likely moves. If I have played chess a bunch I know which moves are more common 
than others, I can use probabilities to make rational choices. This is more realistic because sometimes I make mistakes this
just means I had the probabilities wrong. One important thing to notice with this way of thinking is that humans are somehow
capable of doing what a computer does. We can make a list of moves, we can calculate probabilities, we can make "rational
choices."\\

Limited Perspective
================
The above example illustrates a family of philosophy of mind called computationalism. In computationalism thinking is what a computer
does. Humans also think its just that our hardware is the brain instead of a computer. If you're
goal is to understand how humans play chess then maybe this is a good way of thinking about the problem. However, to think in these
terms we make some simplifying assumptions: the fact that I have to move a piece with my arms and hands is ignored. The fact that
I have to move my eyes around the board to see all the moves is ignored. The fact that my thoughts have to be very quick and
efficient is generally ignored. Things being ignored isn't that big of a problem: physicists ignore friction, chemists ignore
quantum mechanics, economicists ignore data. Ignoring things is a big part of science. What you choose to ignore however is still
an important question and often depends on your model system. For an alternative let's consider what we ignore and don't ignore
when we take as our example Dead Cells instead of Chess.\\

An Embodied Context
===================
For those of you who haven't played dead cells it is a 2D platformer/hack n slash game. You can kill things with your weapons and avoid
getting hit by enemies. Unlike Chess your interactions with the game are in real time. You need to dodge, attack, jump, and plan your way
through to be a level. This makes it kind of hard to ignore certain facts about the game. You have to consider how quick the system is to
acting in the environment, how the environment is being navigated, how a previous decision impacts the next one and so on. What you choose
to ignore in a sense has to be different.\\
Taking this to be your model system you will notice two things about thinking that may not be as easily apparent when you think about chess.
First the position of the character in space matters a lot. This is what we call embodiment. It matters allot the actions a character can take
it matters a lot what weapon they are using, it matters a lot how high they can jump and how fast they can travel. All of these features will
fundamentally affect how a given player plays the game. The second thing you'll notice is that it's not just the body which is used to make
decisions. If you watch someone playing dead cells they will often dodge into a door. Dodging into a door has the effect of breaking the door.
By breaking the door I create a marker which tells me I have already been in this area. I don't need to remember every place I went on the
map. I changed the environment so that I can use my sense to make that decision rather than remembering it. Kind of like taking notes in a 
journal (cite chalmers clark). This second property is what we call situatedness. Situadedness means that thinking is not just something
we do with our brains and bodies but we also think using our environment. This is also why usually if you are trying to be more productive
you can change your environment. A change in your environment is also a change in your mind.

Dynamics
===========
Usually when we abstract away a concept the first to go is time. In chess this is relatively easy the turn order is fixed so time isn't
fundamental. We can always solve the problem and then make it faster. If you play an FPS though you should know this isn't very possible.
In an FPS timing is everything. All the players play in parallel how you time your actions is just as important as the actions themselves.
This is also part of what I believe to be one of the most important parts of thinking. When we think we are not independent of time our
thoughts happen in time. This is the so called dynamical aspect of cognition. Dynamics means things that change over time. The dynamics of
time only becomes apparent when we look at certain games to be our model system. As most gamers know however, most modern games require a
intuitive and skilled use of timing. If you ignore time it can be easy to think the cognitive work needs to be distributed over space. Which
in some sense they are. But it is crucial to understand that cognitive work not only extends over space but also time. The moments between moments
can themselves have computational value which means that the system can embed calculations across time and thus the relevant dynamics can emerge.
This is a fundamental shift in the computationalist view of mind.

Conclusion
============
So now we know that thinking happens across our bodies, across our environment, across time. From here we should start to a see a picture
emerging. Thinking is not something that we can say happens in on spot in one moment. Instead, thinking something continuously happening
all over the place. How could we even begin to understand such a complex phenomena. I come at this question by considering simple abstract
entities how could an animal in an environment think is a fundamental question and we must come up with new ways to answer it.

Topics That Interest me
======
- Embodied Cognition
- The Philosophy of Biology
- What Cognition Can Tell Us About Politics

