---
title: 'A Place For Purpose'
date: 2021-05-14
permalink: /posts/2021/05/ScienceOfMeaning/
tags:
  - Minds
  - Philosophy
  - Umwelt
---

Life has a peculiar property, a strange specifity, a unique 
universality, if you will. Life, unlike most other forms of matter, 
has purpose. The sciences of life and mind come with baggage. They
are complicated by generations of cultural norms and philosophical 
debates. Every scientific claim, experimental design, and theoretical 
insight is a bag of philosophical worms some bigger than 
Shai-Hulud. Purpose (teleology) is a perfect example.


Making Choices
==========
Life is abundant. It comes in many forms each with their own weird
ways of being. Although, this makes theorizing about life, proper,
hard it has an advantage that for any philosophical discussion we
can find a simple example. To understand the notion of choice let
us consider one of my absolute favorite thinking things, the 
paramecium. Paramecium will climb a sugar gradient. This is a way
of saying that if you leave a trail of candy this little bacteria 
will follow it. So what? 

When paramecium is in the presence of sugar it changes its behavior.
It stops what it is doing and starts following the trail. There is no
single part of it that uniquely turns 

A gas kinda just does it's own thing. There are many particles, each
moves according the forces acting upon it. This process results in 
diffusion. Eventually the gas spreads everywhere. 
A bacteria will not diffuse until it dies. All its pieces will stay
in place. A ball at the top of a hill rolls down to bottom. 
A bacteria, if you leave a trail of sweets will follow. It will follow 
even if gravity pushes it the other way. Bacteria, and this a 
metaphor for life, do not seem to follow traditional physical laws.
This isn't ex



Let's start with free will.
[Wow, what a concept](https://youtu.be/FYJ1dbyDcrI?t=9). 
Almost by definition (traditional libertarian) free will means 
independence from material causes. To have free will I must be
able to make decisions independent of my physical circumstances.
This becomes a problem because
scientists are committed exclusively to material causes. We believe
that theoretical rigour and proper experimental design can lead to 
truth. If free will existed this wouldn't be possible.
So as scientists we give up on free will. 

Okay sure, for a physicist or
a chemist giving up on free will is easy. We are all just particles
and reactions. It just so happens those particles and reactions change
in just the right way to make up us. 
If you are studying minds though this is still a problem. By choosing 
minds as the topic, we have committed to a set of phenomena we must 
explain. One of those phenomena is how a thinking thing chooses 
to do something. Choice is built into the very idea of minds. 
So can we create a materialist theory of choices?

doesn't work. A mind makes decisions. So how can we give up on free will
without giving up on decisions? 

Enter Normativity
===============
If we want to make the notion of decisions purely deterministic we need to
say why the decision was made. More specifically we need to say why one 
decision was made instead of another. In physics and chemistry we don't have
to consider alternative cases because we are not interested in the 
relationship between two possibilities. In biology and psychology the reason 
one choice is
made over another is exactly the thing we are interested in. This ability to
compare two possible paths and pick one as valid/correct/good is called
Normativity. A science of mind must explain normativity. A more intuitive
word may be "meaning."
When I as a person make a decision somethings are meaningful to that decision
somethings are not. To do a science of mind we have to find ways of saying what
is meaningful and what isn't. Normativity is simply the most minimal version of
something being meaningful.

Utility Functions
=================
Answering such a question scientifically is daunting.
Traditionally, scientists ignore this question entirely. Most explanations of behavior
rely on putting the agent under conditions in which correct or incorrect behavior is
defined by the experimenter not by the agent itself. In other theoretical work, often
inspired by classical economics, an abstract single number called utility is defined
and normativity and meaning are reduced to this constant value that has one specific 
real world correspondent (almost as if the only kind of meaning is money or something 
that acts a lot like money).

Agent-Environment
==================
What's the alternative? How can we conceive of meaning in a formal way without relying 
on the same simplifying assumptions? One way to we can start to think about this problem
is by considering the idea of an [Umwelt](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Umwelt). Imagine 
being a worm living in the dirt. You have terrible eyesight and can barely hear, but you can sense
vibrations very well. How big is the difference between two different people walking past?
How different is moisturized vs dry dirt? What is meaningful
to a worm is different than what is meaningful to a person not because the worm is less
intelligent but simply because the things the worm can do and sense are different than
what a human can do and sense. The Umwelt provides us with the seed of an idea that meaning
is a function of how we interact with the world. This idea has since been extended into more
nuanced definitions emphasizing different aspects such as Eleanor and James Gibson's affordances 
and Maturana and Varela's structural coupling. However, a kernel remains consistent. Meaning isn't
just a number where somethings are high or lower valued but instead meaning is a set of relations
between the living and how they interact with the world around them.

Of course, the second definition is a bit harder to mathematize although there have been attempts.
I will try to explore some of these in future posts. Suffice to say for now, we have yet to build
a science of meaning but we are trying. If we succeed we will be well on our way to building a
true understanding of life and mind.
