---
title: 'Box of Knowledge'
date: 2021-12-29
permalink: /posts/2021/12/BoxOfKnowledge/
tags:
  - Situatedness
  - Prose
  - Embodiment
  - Epistemology
---

Knowledge comes in a box. I carry it around, it is on mine always at my side. It is never lost, and never found.
I may open it and use anything inside. If I acquire skill, I may lay it to rest. If it rests too long it disappears
from it's magnificent cradle.

Leaky Boxes
====================
It's wierd that in my amazing little box, I find many of my older moments lost. The
experiences of my youth, the many breakfasts I ate, the many words I've spoken, gone. It's almost
as if my knowledge is not a box at all but a tub with a leak. There is always more flowing in, and I remain
soaking.

Bathing in Oil
===========
However, my knowledge is not all water. Sometimes what drips in feels different. It remains on the surface
never mixing. In fact, my knowledge takes many forms from water, to oil, to gas, to air, to rocks, to people.
My knowledge is not a chalice to be filled but a vibrant mix of many conflicting contradictions ill-posed to
be interchangeable. Each thought fighting for space trying to survive before their eventual decay. A competition
where only the fittest survive. My mind is a market of ideas.

The Essence of Collaboration
=================
In their ruthless expansion sometimes my ideas cooperate, finding ways to survive together where one cannot. 
Sometimes my ideas resonate and give birth to something brand new. My knowledge is not the sum of the ideas
but the collective whole of interactions of it's parts. My knowledge is an ecosystem, some parts compete, some
cooperate, some coexist, and some contradict. 

Knowledge is the World
=====================
My knowledge is vast because it is an ocean, a forest, a sky, a tree, a house, a neighborhood. My knowledge is
my niche in my space and my time. Knowledge doesn't fit in a box, a tub, a market, a harddrive, or a brain. Knowledge
is everywhere and anything. Knowledge is the world in which I live. Living is to know.
