---
title: 'What is this blog?'
date: 2021-05-14
permalink: /posts/2021/05/ThisBlog/
tags:
  - Introduction
  - Purpose
  - Goals
---

I don't know if other people have this thing figured out yet but I am still learning to communicate. 
This blog is practice. I will have hot takes and will be wrong most of the time. Please enjoy.

A Blog of Curiosities
======
Often we think of being an expert on a topic as someone who is very knowledgable of a singular (or small
number of) thing(s). We encourage children to pick something to "be" when they grow up. We force students
to pick from a fixed subset of classes. We "are" whatever job we happen to be doing at the time. This makes
sense in a world in which efficiency is prized and specialization is rewarded of course being an "expert" 
in the above sense is adaptive. In some places though novelty can be just important as efficiency: art and
science are clear examples, although maybe novelty should be considered a bit more in other places as well.
When novelty is necessary specialization is a mind-killer. New ideas don't just exist in the world to be 
found. They are constructed in the moment by combining, comparing, and synthesizing different worlds. 
An expert writer isn't an expert writer because they can write the same sentence over and over again. They
are an expert because they know how to turn an experience into words. A great programmer isn't a great 
programmer because they know a specific package very well but because they learned how to use any package 
when they need to. This is I think a more accurate representation of expertise. Expertise isn't about knowing
one thing very well but about connecting very many things into something greater than the sum of its parts.

I don't think I am an expert at anything but I am trying to become one and I'm not sure about what yet. In this
blog I will explore topics as they come up and interest me. I will try to connect them but those connections may
be contrived or circumstantial. I will not have a complete grasp on any of these concepts but I will try my best
arguments. I am always open to discussion or criticism so feel free to reach out if anyone ends up reading this.



Topics That Interest me
======
- Embodied Cognition
- The Philosophy of Biology
- Radical Politics
- Philosophy of Science
- Process metaphysics
- Will add more ...
