---
title: 'A typology of mind'
date: 2021-08-23
permalink: /posts/2021/08/blog-post-5/
tags:
  - FAQ
  - Cognition
  - Situatedness
  - Embodiment
  - Neurocentrism
---

In 1988 the Pixies asked a question that philosophers and scientists still debate to this day. Since then and maybe a bit before,
we've gotten a few different answers. In the analytic philosophy tradition we have two flavors of definition. Dualistic approaches
to mind rely on a fundamental distinction between matter and mind. In turn, this class of definitions creates a mind-body problem.
Although, chocolate vanilla swirl is popular with more traditional perspective, especially those committed to the existence of 
souls, some prefer a more unified explanation. There tend to be three common choices
- Idealism where everything is mental and matter is a hallucination.
- Neutral Monism which means neither mental nor material are the whole picture and there is something in between.
- Materialism where its matter all the way down.

For the working cognitive scientist materialism or a watered down neutral monism are sort of a job requirement. So how does a 
materialist (or watered down neutral monist) answer the question "Where is my mind?"

To Eliminate or Not
===============
First we need to decide if the question makes any sense at all. Mind is a word used to describe all sorts of patterns in experience
ranging from abstract thought to decision making to consciousness itself. Is mind a coherent enough concept to talk about sensibly?
Let's consider memory as an example. Memory in a computer is a metal rectangle. A specific metal rectangle I can point to.
Memory in an animal could mean anything from how neurons are connected to connected to the cells in 
[their body] (https://now.tufts.edu/articles/total-recall). The word memory

No one scientist could study memory. Its underlying material
causes are diverse and hard to identify.
This is the problem. Either we say that mental phenomena cannot be explained by traditional physical methods or we change what we mean
by mind to make physical methods more applicable. Either way though it becomes very hard to study how love, creativity, thought, or the
many other things 
We can call this the [elimination hypothesis] (https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/materialism-eliminative/). 
The Churchland's make it well. Those who believe in it are called eliminativists. The view comes in degrees and which faculties are 
eliminated creates many sub distinctions. There three more classes all of which could fall under the eliminativist umbrella.

Neurocentrism (Mind-Brain Identity)
===============
One big piece of progress we have made in science was the discovery of the brain. An organ in our head that is always working and seems to
be important for a lot of things. Its connected to every major system in our body and seems to correlate with intelligence across species. What 
if ... we call the brain our mind. The brain is as good a candidate as any. We found the digestive organ (stomach), the breathing organ (lungs),
why not let the brain be the thinking organ. My mind is right here, in my head. Neurocentrism is one of the most dominant ways of thinking not only
in academia but in most atheistic approaches to mind. Neurocentrism is also the work that underpins most of neuroscience as a whole. One limiting 
factor though is that pesky elimination hypothesis. If my mind is my brain then where are my thoughts? Neurons don't look thoughts, they also don't 
act like them. So I can have this cool definition of mind that is material but I have to give up on explaining questions I might traditionally ask, like
what is love, why am I happy, how do I learn? 


Situatedness
============
A few people have realized at this point that our intelligent behavior requires a little more than the brain

Taking Behavior Seriously
==========================
One limitation of traditional ethology was it's lack of mechanistic descriptions. Much of the traditional study was
focused on identifying a library of behaviors rather than tackling what unified all of them. How behavior was 
coordinated was almost completely ignored. In response the field grew a new appendage. One which
added the toolkit of neuroscience. Neuroethology is a discipline concerned with the relationship between brain
and behavior. Neuroethologists not only study how an animal acts and moves but also what is going in the animal's
brain when that movement happens. In this way Neuroethologists provide a mechanistic description of how action and
perception together create behavior. This relationship is itself quite nuanced (future blog post on no controller).

What about the Computers
===========================
Neuroethology is a small niche but one advantage of the label is its general lack of preconceived meaning. Computational
on the other hand means a lot to a lot of people. The computational component of Computational Neuroethology might best 
be understood in relation to computational physics. When quantifying phenomena in the world sometimes things get complicated.
In the world of physics when a physicist is curious about how a fluid flows they do not write out the motion by hand. They use 
a computer to simulate the many complex equations as they interact. This is the computation in computational neuroethology. Except
rather than simulating particles I simulate brains, bodies and environments. I build video game worlds and populate it with realistic animal bodies 
connected to realistic brains. Luckily the worlds of AI and Robotics have made this problem relatively easy. I then compare how 
my virtual robot behaves to how the animal behaves. By doing this over and over again for many different worlds, many different animals,
and many different types of brain, I hope that we will build an improved understanding of who we are and how we think.

Final Words
==================
In short, my day to day work is playing make believe with video game animals.
I am optimistic that it will do more than that though. Humans are part of the most complex system know to man. The ecosystem of our planet.
Humanity unlike any other species has an opportunity to improve the conditions of all living things on this planet. To fulfill that 
responsibility requires a radical rethinking of what it means to be human and what it means to be alive. 
That is also what I hope my work accomplishes.
