---
title: 'What is Computational Neuroethology'
date: 2021-05-13
permalink: /posts/2021/05/blog-post-2/
tags:
  - FAQ
  - Cognition
  - Computational Neuroethology
---

I have had a few people ask me what kind of research I do. I tend to give different answers depending on context.
The easiest label I could give is Computational neuroethology. Although, that label is easy for me and not anyone else. 
The goal of this post is to clear up confusion both for the family that asks what I do and myself.

A Study of Intelligence
===============
Like most neuroscientists, cognitive psychologists, and AI researchers, I am interested in minds. The problem is
no one knows what a mind is. Studying the mind could mean anything from molecular neurobiology to linguistics. The result
is that there are thousands of people doing thousands of things all of whom study the mind. This is expected. Philosophers
have been working on this question for millennia. Nearly every culture and religion has had it its own definition of mind
and self. Finding the truth is a hard problem.\\
Personally, I take a non-traditional view of mind. One which is heavily inspired by the [Biology of Cognition or Santiago
School of Cognition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Santiago_theory_of_cognition). In a future blog post I will explore 
this topic in further detail. For now, suffice to say I think of the study of mind as the study of behaving 
organisms. In my case I focus on animals. Thus one way to describe my research is the study of animal behavior.

What is Ethology
=========
The study of animal behavior has existed for a long time. Charles Darwin himself spent much of his time travelling
and examining animal behavior. Ethology is the term used for the biological side of animal behavior research. What
distinguishes ethology from other biological disciplines is its focus on the "behavioral level." Ethologists study 
how an animal moves, what it looks like, where it lives, how it communicates, and other attributes of the body and
the environment to understand behavior.

Taking Behavior Seriously
==========================
One limitation of traditional ethology was it's lack of mechanistic descriptions. Much of the traditional study was
focused on identifying a library of behaviors rather than tackling what unified all of them. How behavior was 
coordinated was almost completely ignored. In response the field grew a new appendage. One which
added the toolkit of neuroscience. Neuroethology is a discipline concerned with the relationship between brain
and behavior. Neuroethologists not only study how an animal acts and moves but also what is going in the animal's
brain when that movement happens. In this way Neuroethologists provide a mechanistic description of how action and
perception together create behavior. This relationship is itself quite nuanced (future blog post on no controller).

What about the Computers
===========================
Neuroethology is a small niche but one advantage of the label is its general lack of preconceived meaning. Computational
on the other hand means a lot to a lot of people. The computational component of Computational Neuroethology might best 
be understood in relation to computational physics. When quantifying phenomena in the world sometimes things get complicated.
In the world of physics when a physicist is curious about how a fluid flows they do not write out the motion by hand. They use 
a computer to simulate the many complex equations as they interact. This is the computation in computational neuroethology. Except
rather than simulating particles I simulate brains, bodies and environments. I build video game worlds and populate it with realistic animal bodies 
connected to realistic brains. Luckily the worlds of AI and Robotics have made this problem relatively easy. I then compare how 
my virtual robot behaves to how the animal behaves. By doing this over and over again for many different worlds, many different animals,
and many different types of brain, I hope that we will build an improved understanding of who we are and how we think.

Final Words
==================
In short, my day to day work is playing make believe with video game animals.
I am optimistic that it will do more than that though. Humans are part of the most complex system know to man. The ecosystem of our planet.
Humanity unlike any other species has an opportunity to improve the conditions of all living things on this planet. To fulfill that 
responsibility requires a radical rethinking of what it means to be human and what it means to be alive. 
That is also what I hope my work accomplishes.
