---
title: 'What is a Mind'
date: 2021-05-14
permalink: /posts/2021/05/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - Introduction
  - Purpose
  - Goals
---

In the fall of 2019 I took a class called Autopoiesis and Enaction taught by Randall Beer. This course 
changed everything I thought I knew. The ideas are well beyond the scope of a single post, but I will try.

A Definition of Life
======
When you ask people whether science works they will probably say yes. Some may point to electricity and its
many offspring. Others may point to medicine and count the number of lives saved. Chemistry and physics are
two cornerstones of the power of science. Chemistry and physics have a feature that many other sciences seem
to still be figuring out. If you ask a physicist what energy is, they can answer with relative certainty. Ask
a chemist what a chemical is and you will get a standard answer. Ask a biologist what life is and the best they
can do is a set of 7 rules that don't make any sense. We call this property of a science an ontology (what exists).
In physics and chemistry ontology is settled in Biology not so much. The question of what is life remains unanswered.
Humberto Maturana proposed a definition. This definition is powerful and has a lot of implications. I will try to
explain that definition and its consequences. I will not do it justice.

A Model System
================
I am visual learner. I understand things when I can see them. To make this relatively abstra

Structure, Function, and Organization
========================================
To understand the theory of Autopoiesis, we have to disentangle some concepts. 
The first concept we need to address is what Maturana called structure. One way
to think about structure is that it is the token in the type token distinction.
Structure is the literal way things are without abstraction. I can describe the 
structure of a specific object given a specific time frame. For the sake of clarity
let us suppose I want to describe how to make bowl of spaghetti and meatballs. The 
structure of spaghetti and meatballs would be how each noodle is folded and oriented.
It is exactly how many meatballs I have and where each one is. It is the volume of
the sauce and every ingredient that went into the recipe. It is the complete physical
description of a bowl of spaghetti and meatballs. The first thing you should notice is
that if I want to talk about spaghetti and meatballs not all of these properties matter.
It doesn't matter exactly how much sauce I put in. It might matter that the meatballs are
on top and the spaghetti is underneath but not that the fourth noodle from the 
bottom is curved 50 degrees. This is what we call abstraction. By abstracting from the
specifics we can describe many structurally different instantiations of spaghetti and 
meatballs. Now in biological systems the structure is how every atom is place in every
position. What is important is that, the exact position of atoms does not necessarily 
matter. I am the same person when I have food in my mouth as when I don't. Although,
in both cases my structure is different. We can define a collection of properties that
are sufficient to create an abstraction this is what we call organization.\\
Going back to our example as long as there is a collection of wheat noodles with a
certain thickness and some meat-like round objects, I can call the structure 
spaghetti and meatballs. It doesn't matter exactly what every element of the recipe
is as long as certain relational properties are satisfied. This collection of properties
is called organization. Organization is the collection of properties I say are sufficient
to define a thing. This is different than structure. In fact, there are many many structures
that can satisfy the organization I define.\\
Finally we need to distinguish between organization and function. Function is the collection
of relational properties that satisfy the organization. More simply, each component, the noodles,
the meatballs, are all necessary for the organization but they serve different functions. 
Each component has its own function. The noodles serve as a base. The meatballs serve to enhance.
These are their functions the collection of these functions define what we call the functional
relations of the system.\\
In the case of autopoeitic systems their organization is defined by two abstract criteria.
The criteria of self-creation and the criteria of self-distinction. 

+++
Provide definition here
+++

To make sense of these definitions we have to discuss a form of description of the world which 
may be counter intuitive for some. Maturana imagines the universe as a network of precesses. A
network of processes is a classic example of cybernetics: mathy enough to be confusing, but informal
enough to not be math.\\
First let us discuss the notion of a network. A network is simply a collection of things, where some things
are connected to each other. The internet is a network of websites where the connections between things are
hyperlinks. Wikipedia is a subnetwork with similar rules. The internet is also a physical network of computers
and routers connected to one another across the world. Social networks are a common example. People are the things
and two people being friends means they are connected and so on. The most important thing to remember is that 
a network is sufficiently abstract so we can be pretty generous with what we call connections and things. At
the same time a network is structured. The connections between things means that there will patterns and 
regularities. This is why Maturana uses a network as the basis for his description of the universe.
A network of processes can be thought of a world where molecules are the things and chemical reactions are
the connections.\\
So now we have a universe (a network of processes) and we want to define life, a thing in the universe. We
can use this abstract description of the universe to give an us an abstract description of life. First 
let us imagine that some process are self-causal. In network terms this means we find a cycle. A collection
of molecules such that molecule A reacts with molecule B which gives rise to molecule C which then when it 
meets molecule D splits back into molecules A and B and the process happens over and over again. Such a set
of processes would be self-creative. The network of processes is such that it constructs other components of
the network.\\
This is the first condition for understanding Autopoiesis. The second is the self-distinction
criterion. It can't just be the case that you have reactions that self catalyze you also need those reactions
to separate themselves from the rest of the environment. In the case of a cell we see the formation of a cell wall.
In the case of humans for example we find skin. This process of creating a boundary to hold all the self creating
stuff in is the process called self-distinction. However, a subtle but important point is to remember no one else
put the skin on the animal. No one put the cell inside the membrane. The system constructs its own boundaries. The
system itself creates the parts that keep it together. This is crucial for the self-distinction criterion and the
self-creation to both be maintained.\\
Thus we know have a definition of Autopoeisis and if Maturana/Varela and their crew are right, we have a definition of life.
Ok we know what living things are, now what?
Well we know about this thing called minds. Can we define minds in relationship to this thing we call life.


1) Structure vs organization
2) Self-creation
3) self distinction
4) Life
5) Mind
6) Implications

Topics That Interest me
======
- Embodied Cognition
- The Philosophy of Biology
- What Cognition Can Tell Us About Politics

